Update introduction documentation (#67)
optakt/flow-dps: docs/introduction.md

**Table of Contents**

1. [Getting Started](#getting-started)
2. [Flow overview](#flow)
    1. [Rules](#rules)
    2. [Errors](#errors)
    3. [Execution state vs Protocol state](#execution-state-vs-protocol-state)
3. [Flow Node roles](#flow-node-roles)

>     * [Collector Nodes](#collector-nodes)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    * [Collection Nodes](#collection-nodes)
```

Applies to the whole doc

## Flow

Most current blockchains are built as a homogenous system comprised of *full nodes*.

> Each full node is expected to collect and choose the transactions to be included in the next block, execute the block, come to a consensus over the output of the block with other full nodes, and finally sign the block and append it to the chain.

Reviewer 2: This is not entirely accurate. Every full node collect and propagate transactions.

However, for proof-of-work blockchains, only miners actually create blocks these days; normal nodes can no longer compete with the massive computation power of mining companies.

For proof-of-stake blockchains, which is a more apt comparison for Flow, one leader is chosen for each consensus round, and that leader node is the only one proposing a block with transactions.

Also, the signing part doesn't make sense. In proof-of-work, there is no signing. In proof-of-stake, the proposer signs his block proposal before it is validated by everyone. Other nodes who validated it will sign it as well as a "vote" for the proposal, and if it collects enough votes, the block is finalized and stored along with all of the signatures.

Author: Noted. This whole paragraph now looks pretty wrong, given the background :) Should I perhaps remove it entirely?

"only miners actually create blocks these days" - is it because their role/status in the system is different, or is it just a manifestation of their computational power?

For proof-of-stake blockchains - are all of the nodes otherwise the same? E.g. there's 10 identical nodes, and of them one is chosen as the leader that will propose the block, remaining ones are (potential?) validators?

Existing blockchain architectures have well documented throughput limitations. There are two main approaches to combat this:

1. Layer-2 networks

> 2. Sharding

Reviewer 2: That's not really much of a different, to be honest. Layer-2 networks also create a certain sub-state of the main consensus state, where more transactions happen. I guess the only difference between sharding and layer-2 solutions is whether the main state is divided into several states.

Layer-2 solutions include include networks like Bitcoin's Lightning and Ethereum's Plasma — these networks work off the main chain.

> Sharding is a technique where a network is broken up into many interconnected networks.

Reviewer 2: I would say `several` rather than `many`.

> Sharding significantly increases the complexity of the programming model by breaking ACID guarantees (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability), increasing the cost and time for application development.

Reviewer 2: Overall, this is a short and concise explanation though :+1:

Flow was designed to provide a blockchain that can scale while preserving composability in a single blockchain state.
This is achieved by a novel approach where work traditionally assigned to full nodes is split and assigned to specific roles, allowing pipelining.
We recognize the following roles in the Flow architecture.

1. Collection role — in charge of transaction collection from the user agents
2. Execution role — in charge of executing the transactions
3. Consensus role — maintain the chain of blocks and responsible for the chain extension by appending new blocks. These nodes also rule on reported misbehaviors of other nodes
4. Verification role — done by a more extensive set of verification nodes, they confirm that the execution results are correct

> 5. Access role — also called Observer role — includes nodes that relay data to protocol-external entities that are not participating in the protocol

Reviewer 2: I wonder how much of this you just copied? Or is this in your own words? Whenever you just copy passages, I would suggest you summarize them instead and link to the original documents.

Author: This one is pretty similar in the original docs, I think I did copy it and rephrase a bit, and arranged the node roles in a list rather than a paragraph. I felt it provided a nice comparison/summary of the different roles.

Author: Should I remove this, what's the ruling?

Using those [node roles](#flow-node-roles), each type of node can be optimized according to the tasks it performs.
For instance, execution nodes are compute-optimized nodes, leveraging large-scale data centers, while collection nodes are highly bandwidth-optimized.

> Consensus and verification nodes have moderate hardware requirements, allowing for a high degree of participation, requiring only a high-end consumer internet connection.

Reviewer 2: That's the plan, but it's not really true as it is today. Maybe you can add that nuance to it.

## Flow

Most current blockchains are built as a homogenous system comprised of *full nodes*.
Each full node is expected to collect and choose the transactions to be included in the next block, execute the block, come to a consensus over the output of the block with other full nodes, and finally sign the block and append it to the chain.

Existing blockchain architectures have well documented throughput limitations. There are two main approaches to combat this:

1. Layer-2 networks
2. Sharding

> Layer-2 solutions include include networks like Bitcoin's Lightning and Ethereum's Plasma - these networks work off the main chain.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Layer-2 solutions include include networks like Bitcoin's Lightning and Ethereum's Plasma — these networks work off the main chain.
```

Should be an _em dash_ (—) instead of an _en dash_ (-). Applies to the rest of the doc as well.

> Sharding represents a technique where a network is broken up into many interconnected networks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sharding is a technique where a network is broken up into many interconnected networks.
```

Sharding significantly increases the complexity of the programming model by breaking ACID guarantees (Atomicity, Consistency, Isolation and Durability), increasing the cost and time for application development.

Flow was designed to provide a blockchain that can scale while preserving composability in a single blockchain state.
This is achieved by a novel approach where work traditionally assigned to full nodes is split and assigned to specific roles, allowing pipelining.
We recognize the following roles in the Flow architecture.

1. Collector role - in charge of transaction collection from the user agents
2. Execution role - in charge of executing the transactions
3. Consensus role - maintain the chain of blocks and responsible for the chain extension by appending new blocks. These nodes also rule on reported misbehaviors of other nodes

> 4. Verification role - done by a more extensive set of Verification Nodes, they confirm that the execution results are correct

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Verification role - done by a more extensive set of verification nodes, they confirm that the execution results are correct
```

5. Access role - also called Observer role - includes nodes that relay data to protocol-external entities that are not participating in the protocol

> By introducing several [node roles](#flow-node-roles), each type of node can be optimized according to the tasks it will perform.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using those [node roles](#flow-node-roles), each type of node can be optimized according to the tasks it performs.
```

> For instance, Execution Nodes are compute-optimized nodes, leveraging large-scale data centers, while Collector Nodes are highly bandwidth-optimized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, execution nodes are compute-optimized nodes, leveraging large-scale data centers, while collection nodes are highly bandwidth-optimized.
```

> Consensus and Verification Nodes have moderate hardware requirements, allowing for a high degree of participation, requiring only a high-end consumer internet connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Consensus and verification nodes have moderate hardware requirements, allowing for a high degree of participation, requiring only a high-end consumer internet connection.
```

> This architecture lead to a throughput increase by a multiplicative factor of 56.
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

- Honest Stake Fraction
    - Flow requires more than two thirds (2/3) of [stake](#staking) from [collection](#collection-nodes), [consensus](#consensus-nodes) and [verification](#verification-nodes) nodes to be controlled by honest actors (for each node role separately). A super-majority (two thirds) of honest nodes probabilistically guarantees the safety of the Flow protocol.

### Errors

> Flow is designed to guarantee that any error introduced by the execution nodes are always guaranteed to have four critical attributes:

Reviewer 2: I think this is true not just for execution nodes, but for all of them. You might want to pro-actively double check with the Flow team :)

Author: I also think that it's true for all errors. For instance, if there's a missing collection, execution nodes can issue a slashing challenge against the cluster of collection nodes that should provide the collection (the guarantors). That somewhat implies that the rules are the same.

However I think in the technical docs they were only explicit about the execution nodes. I will double check :)

* **Punishable**: All nodes participating in a Flow network, including execution nodes, must put up a [stake](#staking) that can be [slashed](#slashing) if they are found to have exhibited [Byzantine behavior](#byzantine-fault). Since all errors in deterministic processes are detectable and attributable, those errors can be reliably punished via [slashing](#slashing).
* **Recoverable**: The system must have a means to undo errors are they are detected. The property services to deter malicious actors from inducing errors that benefit them more than the slashing penalty.

### Execution State vs Protocol State

Flow differentiates between two sorts of states:
1. Execution state (computational state)
2. Protocol state (network infrastructure state)

Execution and protocol states are maintained and updated independently. Execution state is maintained and updated by the execution nodes, while the protocol state is maintained and updated by the consensus nodes.

The execution state contains the register values which are modified by the transaction execution. Updates to the execution states are done by the execution nodes but their integrity is governed by the verification process.

> The protocol state keeps track of the system related features like staked nodes, node roles, public keys, network addresses and staking amounts.

Reviewer 2: The protocol state also tracks the chain of blocks by creating consensus amongst network participants on what the objectiv pre-determined order of transactions is (which is done implicitly by ordering collections and a deterministic algorithm to then determine the transaction order within the blocks).

It is updated when the nodes are slashed, join the system via staking or leave the system by unstaking.
Consensus nodes publish updates on the protocol state directly as part of the blocks they generate.
Consensus protocol guarantees the integrity of the protocol state.

To better illustrate the difference and the independence of the two states, we can consider two scenarios:

**Scenario 1**: Nodes never join, leave or change stake. Transactions are regularly processed. In this system, the protocol state never changes, but the execution state does.

> **Scenario 2**: No transactions are submitted/processed. Nodes are regularly joining or leaving the network — here only the network infrastructure/protocol state changes.

Reviewer 2: Yep, that makes sense. However, please note that in scenario 2, the blockchain will still grow, even though the blocks are all empty. Please make sure to include the evolution of the block chain history as part of the protocol state.

Author: I touch on that in the `Block Formation` section:

> If there are no guaranteed collections, consensus nodes will continue block formation with an empty set of collections — block formation is never blocked.

A guaranteed collection is broadcast by the guarantors to all consensus nodes.

To vote to append a transaction to a collection, a collection node must verify that:
1. The collection node has received all the relevant transactions
2. The transaction is well-formed
3. Appending the transaction does not result in duplicate transactions
4. There are no common transactions between the current collection under construction and any other collection that the cluster of the collection node already guaranteed

Collection node must store all the transactions of all guaranteed collections, and must produce relevant transaction when requested by the execution nodes. If they fail to do so, they will be slashed, along with the rest of the cluster.

### Consensus Nodes

The consensus nodes work with transaction batches - [_collections_](#collection-nodes), submitted by the collection nodes.
They form blocks from collections, are in charge of sealing those blocks, and adjudicate slashing requests from other nodes (for example, claims that an execution node has produced incorrect outputs.)

> Since the responsibility to maintain a large state is delegated to specialized nodes, hardware requirements for consensus nodes remain moderate even for high-throughput blockchains.

Reviewer 2: Not true at the moment. Let's say that this is aspirational at the moment.

As opposed to other node roles, consensus nodes deal with subjective problems, where there is no single correct answer.
Instead, one answer must be selected through mutual agreement, which is why it is critical for consensus nodes to be numerous and decentralized, and less so for other nodes.
This design increases decentralization by allowing for higher levels of participation in consensus by individuals with suitable consumer hardware on home internet connections.

When a consensus node receives a guaranteed collection of transactions, it has to run its consensus algorithm to reach an agreement with other nodes over the set of collections to be included in the next block.
A block of the ordered collections that has undergone the complete consensus algorithm is called a **finalized block**.
A block specifies the included collections as well as the other inputs (randomness seed, etc.) which are required to execute the computation.
It is worth noting that a block in Flow does not include the resulting execution state of the block execution.

> In order for consensus nodes to seal blocks, they must commit to the execution result of a block after it is executed and verified.

Reviewer 2: I think we should explain what sealing means somewhere in this paragraph.

_A block can be sealed after it has been executed by the execution nodes and the execution result has been verified by a sufficient number of verification nodes. When consensus nodes received enough result approvals to agree on the execution result of a block, they include a seal attesting to the execution state after the block execution into the chain, at which point the block is considered sealed._

#### Block Formation

Block formation is a continuous process performed by the consensus nodes to form new blocks. Block formation has several purposes:

1. Including newly submitted guaranteed collections and reaching aggreement over the order of them
2. Provide a measure of time by continuously publishing blocks (determining the length of an epoch)
3. Publish block seals for previous blocks of the chain. The block is ready to be sealed when
    1. It has been finalized by the consensus nodes
    2. It has been executed by the execution nodes
    3. The execution results are approved by the verification nodes
4. Publishing slashing challenges and respective adjudications results (rulings)
5. Publishing protocol state updates
    - staking, unstaking and slashing
    - whenever a nodes stake changes, consensus nodes include that update in the next block

> 6. Providing a state of randomness

Reviewer 2: I don't know if it's worded like this in the Flow docs, but it doesn't make sense. It's a `seed` for randomness.

If there are no guaranteed collections, consensus nodes will continue block formation with an empty set of collections — block formation is never blocked.

Sealing a block's computation result is done **after** the block itself is finalized.
After the computation results have been broadcast as execution receipts, the consensus nodes wait for the verification in the form of **result approvals** by the verification nodes.
When a super-majority has approved the result (and no errors were found) — execution result is considered for **sealing**.

> A **block seal** is included in the next block that the consensus nodes finalize, meaning that the block seal for a block is stored in a later block.

Reviewer 2: This ties in nicely with the previous description I suggested. Maybe you can keep it to a shorter summary earlier, and then the reader gets the full background here.

This can, however, lead to waste or resources if a block is abandoned later.
Also, validity of unfinalized blocks is not guaranteed — execution node may be processing an invalid block.

Execution nodes:
- receive a finalized block
- execute the transactions
- update the execution state of the system

During the execution process the following operations occur:
- each collection of transactions from the finalized block is retrieved from the relevant cluster
- execution node executes the transactions according to their canonical order and update the execution state of the system
- an execution receipt is built for the block. An execution receipt is a cryptographic commitment on the execution result of the block
- the execution receipt is broadcast to the verification nodes and consensus nodes

#### Collection retrieval

Blocks being executed contain a number of guaranteed collections. Guaranteed collections only include a hash of the set of transactions, not their full texts.
Execution nodes retrieve the collection text from the appropriate cluster, and reconstruct the collection hash from the transaction text to verify data consistency.

> Transactions are processed in order.

Reviewer 2: This means that consensus node never have access to the full transactions. That's somewhat important, because it means they can't easily be biased towards including certain transactions over others; at least not at a whole system level. Doesn't stop them from colluding on a actor-by-actor basis.

#### Block Execution

A block is executed when the previous block's execution result is known.
This previous execution result is the starting point for the execution of the block.

Execution receipt for a block includes execution nodes signature, execution result and [SPoCKs](#specialized-proof-of-confidential-knowledge).
An execution receipt is a signed execution result.
The execution receipts can be used to challenge the claims of an execution node when they are shown to be incorrect.
They are also used to create proofs of the current state of the chain once they are known to be correct.

The execution result of a block includes:
- block hash
- hash reference to the previous execution result
- one or more chunks
- commitment to the final execution state of the system after executing the block

> 

Reviewer 2: It would be good to note somewhere that _only_ execution nodes have access to the execution state within the Flow system. And that this is the motivation behind creation of the DPS in the first place: providing an out-of-band scalable gateway to access the Flow execution state, without putting load on the Flow system itself.

Execution results have one or more **chunks**.
**Chunking** is a process of dividing a block's computation into smaller pieces so that individual chunks can be executed and verified in a distributed and parallel manner by many verification nodes.
Chunks aim to be equally computation-heavy, to avoid a scenario where some verification nodes take too long to verify a specific chunk.
There is a system-wide threshold for chunk computation consumption. 

> Each chunk corresponds to a [collection](#collection-nodes).

Reviewer 2: Which kind of cancels out the point that they can be equally computation-heavy... I think that's an aspect that was given up on due to the complexity with SPoCKs it would create.

Author: This was the comment that I wanted to consult about, since I didn't quite get what you meant. Could you elaborate a bit?

* **Attributable**: The output of all deterministic processes in Flow but be signed with the identity of the node that generated those results. As such, any error that has been detected can be clearly attributed to the node(s) that were responsible for that process.
* **Punishable**: All nodes participating in a Flow network, including execution nodes, must put up a [stake](#staking) that can be [slashed](#slashing) if they are found to have exhibited [Byzantine behavior](#byzantine-fault). Since all errors in deterministic processes are detectable and attributable, those errors can be reliably punished via [slashing](#slashing).
* **Recoverable**: The system must have a means to undo errors are they are detected. The property services to deter malicious actors from inducing errors that benefit them more than the slashing penalty.

### Execution State vs Protocol State

Flow differentiates between two sorts of states:
1. Execution State (computational state)
2. Protocol State (network infrastructure state)

> Execution State and Protocol State are maintained and updated independently. Execution state is maintained and updated by the Execution Nodes, while the Protocol State is maintained and updated by the Consensus Nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execution and protocol states are maintained and updated independently. The execution state is maintained and updated by the execution nodes, while the protocol state is maintained and updated by the consensus nodes.
```

> Execution sState contains the register values which are modified by the transaction execution. Updates to the execution states are done by the Execution Nodes but their integrity is governed by the verification process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution state contains the register values which are modified by the transaction execution. Updates to the execution states are done by the execution nodes but their integrity is governed by the verification process.
```

> Protocol state keeps track of the system related features like staked nodes, node roles, public keys, network addresses and staking amounts. Protocol state is updated when the nodes are slashed, join the system via staking or leave the system by unstaking. Consensus Nodes publish updates on the protocol state directly as part of the blocks they generate. Consensus protocol guarantees the integrity of the protocol state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The protocol state keeps track of the system related features like staked nodes, node roles, public keys, network addresses and staking amounts.
It is updated when the nodes are slashed, join the system via staking or leave the system by unstaking.
Consensus nodes publish updates on the protocol state directly as part of the blocks they generate.
The consensus protocol guarantees the integrity of the protocol state.
```

To better illustrate the difference and the independence of the two states, we can consider two scenarios:

**Scenario 1**: Nodes never join, leave or change stake. Transactions are regularly processed. In this system, the protocol state never changes, but the execution state does.

> **Scenario 2**: No transactions are submitted/processed. Nodes are regularly joining or leaving the network - here only the network infrastructure / protocol state changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Scenario 2**: No transactions are submitted/processed. Nodes are regularly joining or leaving the network — here only the network infrastructure/protocol state changes.
```

Cluster sizes are hinted to be in the range of 20-80 nodes in a mature system.

At the beginning of an epoch, each Collector Node is randomly assigned to exactly one cluster.
Number of clusters is a protocol parameter.

Each cluster of collection nodes acts as a gateway to Flow from the external world.
There is a **one-way deterministic assignment** between each transaction and a cluster that is responsible for processing it.
When a Collector Node receives a transaction, it also checks whether it was submitted to the correct cluster.
The clustering mechanism avoids heterogeneous systems where a Collector Node with better service would be getting all the traffic and end up reducing the decentralization of the whole system as well as starving out other Collector Nodes.

Example of a typical sequence for a Collector Node:

1. Collector Node receives a transaction from a user agent
2. Collector Node broadcasts that transaction to the other nodes in its Cluster.
3. Cluster is batching transactions into **collections**.
4. Collection is submitted to Consensus Nodes for **inclusion into a block**.

> #### Collection formation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Collection Formation
```

A collection is an ordered list of one or more transactions.

> Collection formation is a process that
> - starts when a user agent submits a transaction to the Collector Node, and
> - ends when a guaranteed collection is submitted to the Consensus Nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Collection formation is a process that starts when a user agent submits a transaction to the collection node, and ends when a guaranteed collection is submitted to the consensus nodes.
```

Cluster nodes continually form consensus on when to start a new collection, the set of transactions to include in the collection under construction, and when to close the current collection and submit it to the Consensus Nodes.
As a result of this consensus, a collection grows over time.

Collections are built one at a time - current collection must be closed and submitted to the Consensus Nodes before a new collection can be started. 

> A Collection is closed when the c**ollection size has reached a certain threshold**, or a **predefined time span has passed**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Collection is closed when the **collection size has reached a certain threshold**, or a **predefined time span has passed**.
```

> Once a collection has been submitted to the Consensus Nodes, it becomes a **guaranteed collection**. A guaranteed collection is an immutable data structure. Each node in the cluster that participated in forming the guaranteed collection is called a **guarantor**. Guarantor attests that all transactions in the collection are well formed, and that they will store the entire collection including the full script of all transactions for as long as it is necessary (until Execution Nodes are done executing them). A guaranteed collection is broadcast by the guarantors to all Consensus Nodes.

Reviewer: I'd suggest splitting the lines

```suggestion
Once a collection has been submitted to the Consensus Nodes, it becomes a **guaranteed collection**.
A guaranteed collection is an immutable data structure.
Each node in the cluster that participated in forming the guaranteed collection is called a **guarantor**.
Guarantors attest that all transactions in the collection are well-formed, and that they will store the entire collection including the full script of all transactions for as long as it is necessary (until execution nodes are done executing them).
A guaranteed collection is broadcast by the guarantors to all consensus nodes.
```

To vote to append a transaction to a collection, a Collector Node must verify that:
1. The Collector Node has received all the relevant transactions

> 2. Transaction is well-formed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The transaction is well-formed
```

As opposed to other node roles, consensus nodes deal with subjective problems, where there is no single correct answer.
Instead, one answer must be selected through mutual agreement, which is why it is critical for consensus nodes to be numerous and decentralized, and less so for other nodes.
This design increases decentralization by allowing for higher levels of participation in consensus by individuals with suitable consumer hardware on home internet connections.

When a consensus node receives a guaranteed collection of transactions, it has to run its consensus algorithm to reach an agreement with other nodes over the set of collections to be included in the next block.
A block of the ordered collections that has undergone the complete consensus algorithm is called a **finalized block**.
A block specifies the included collections as well as the other inputs (randomness seed, etc.) which are required to execute the computation.
It is worth noting that a block in Flow does not include the resulting execution state of the block execution.

In order for consensus nodes to seal blocks, they must commit to the execution result of a block after it is executed and verified.

> #### Block formation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
#### Block Formation
```

Applies everywhere

> Block formation is a continuous process executed by the Consensus Nodes to form new blocks. Block formation has several purposes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Block formation is a continuous process performed by the Consensus Nodes to form new blocks. Block formation has several purposes:
```

1. Including newly submitted guaranteed collections and reaching aggreement over the order of them
2. Provide a measure of time by continuously publishing blocks (determining the length of an epoch)
3. Publish block seals for previous blocks of the chain. The block is ready to be sealed when
    1. It has been finalized by the Consensus Nodes
    2. It has been executed by the Execution Nodes
    3. The execution results are approved by the Verification Nodes
4. Publishing slashing challenges and respective adjudications results (rulings)
5. Publishing protocol state updates
    - staking, unstaking and slashing
    - whenever a nodes stake changes, Consensus Nodes include that update in the next block
6. Providing a state of randomness

If there are no guaranteed collections, Consensus Nodes will continue block formation with an empty set of collections - block formation is never blocked.

> Sealing a blocks computation result is done **after** the block itself is finalized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Sealing a block's computation result is done **after** the block itself is finalized.
```

After the computation results have been broadcast as Execution Receipts, the Consensus Nodes wait for the verification in the form of **Result Approvals** by the Verification Nodes.

> When a super-majority has approved the result (and no errors were found / slashing results were issued) - Execution Result is considered for **sealing**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a super-majority has approved the result (and no errors were found) - Execution Result is considered for **sealing**.
```

> **Block Seal** is included in the next block that the Consensus Nodes finalize - block seal for a block is stored in a later block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A **Block Seal** is included in the next block that the Consensus Nodes finalize, meaning that the block seal for a block is stored in a later block.
```

### Execution Nodes

The Execution Nodes determine the results of [transactions](#transactions) when executed in the order determined by the [consensus nodes](#consensus-nodes). 
They are responsible for scaling the computational power of the blockchain, and are the only node role to have access to the **execution state**.
Execution nodes follow new blocks as they are published by the Consensus Nodes.

> Execution process starts when the Consensus Nodes broadcast evidence that the next block is finalized.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution process starts when the consensus nodes broadcast evidence that the next block is finalized.
```

The process ends when the Execution Nodes broadcast their **execution receipts**.

> Conservative Execution Nodes only process finallized blocks to avoid wasting resources.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conservative Execution Nodes only process finalized blocks to avoid wasting resources.
```

An Execution Node can be optimistic - they are allowed to work on unfinalized blocks.
This can, however, lead to waste or resources if a block is abandoned later.
Also, validity of unfinalized blocks is not guaranteed - Execution Node may be processing an invalid block.

Execution nodes:
- receive a finalized block
- execute the transactions
- update the execution state of the system

During the execution process the following operations occur:
- each collection of transactions from the finalized block is retrieved from the relevant cluster

> - Execution Node executes the transactions according to their cannonical order and update the execution state of the system

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Execution nodes execute the transactions according to their canonical order and update the execution state of the system
```

> - an Execution Receipt is built for the block. Execution Receipt is a cryptographic commitment on the execution result of the block

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- an Execution Receipt is built for the block. An execution receipt is a cryptographic commitment on the execution result of the block
```

> - Execution Receipt is broadcast to the Verification Nodes and Consensus Nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The execution receipt is broadcast to the verification nodes and consensus nodes
```

#### Collection retrieval

> Block being executed contains a number of guaranteed collections. Guaranteed collections only includes a hash of the set of transactions, not their full texts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Blocks being executed contain a number of guaranteed collections. Guaranteed collections only include a hash of the set of transactions, not their full texts.
```

> Execution Node retrieves the collection text from the appropriate cluster, and reconstructs the collection hash from the transaction text to verify the data consistency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execution nodes retrieve the collection text from the appropriate cluster, and reconstruct the collection hash from the transaction text to verify the data consistency.
```

Transactions are processed in order.

#### Block Execution

> A block is executed when the previous blocks Execution Result is known.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A block is executed when the previous block's Execution Result is known.
```

This previous Execution Result is the starting point for the execution of the block.

> Execution Receipt for a block includes Execution Nodes signature, Excution Result and [SPoCKs](#specialized-proof-of-confidential-knowledge).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execution receipts for blocks include execution nodes signatures, execution results and [SPoCKs](#specialized-proof-of-confidential-knowledge).
```

> Execution Receipt is a signed Execution Result.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An execution receipt is a signed execution result.
```

The Execution Receipts can be used to challenge the claims of an execution node when they are shown to be incorrect.
They are also used to create proofs of the current state of the chain once they are known to be correct.

> Execution Result of a block includes:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The execution result of a block includes:
```

- block hash
- hash reference to the previous execution result
- one or more chunks
- commitment to the final execution state of the system after executing the block

> Execution result has one or more **chunks**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Execution results have one or more **chunks**.
```

> **Chunking** is a process of dividing blocks computation into smaller pieces so that individual chunks can be executed and verified in a distributed and parallel manner by many verification nodes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Chunking** is a process of dividing a block's computation into smaller pieces so that individual chunks can be executed and verified in a distributed and parallel manner by many verification nodes.
```

> Chunks aim to be equally computation-heavy, to avoid a scenario where Verification Node takes too much time to verify a specific chunk.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Chunks aim to be equally computation-heavy, to avoid a scenario where some verification nodes take too long to verify a specific chunk.
```

> There is a system wide threshold for chunk computation consumption. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a system-wide threshold for chunk computation consumption. 
```

Each chunk corresponds to a [collection](#collector-nodes).

### Verification Nodes

The verification nodes are in charge of collectively verifying the correctness of the execution nodes' published results.
With the chunking approach of Flow, each node only checks a small fraction of chunks.
A verification node requests the information it needs for re-computing the chunks it is checking from the execution nodes.
It approves the result of a chunk by publishing a **Result Approval** for that chunk.

> When enough Result Approvals have been issued, Consensus Nodes publish Block Seal as part of the new blocks they finalize.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When enough result approvals have been issued, consensus nodes publish a block seal as part of the new block they finalize.
```

Verification Nodes verifiably self-select the chunks they check independently of each other.
Any Execution Receipt can be checked in isolation.

> If correct, Verifier signs the Execution Result - not the Execution Receipt. Multiple consistent Execution Receipts have identical Execution Results.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If correct, the verifier signs the execution result — not the execution receipt. Multiple consistent Execution Receipts have identical execution results.
```

[More information](https://eth.wiki/fundamentals/patricia-tree)

### Specialized Proof of Confidential Knowledge

Specialized Proof of Confidential Knowledge or SPoCK allows provers to demonstrate that they have some confidential knowledge (secret) without leaking any information about the secret.

> It is Flows countermeasure so that Execution Node cannot just copy the result from another Execution Node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It is Flow's countermeasure so that execution nodes cannot just copy the result from another execution node.
```

You can then run the DPS, and it should properly build its index based on the given information.

## More Resources

* [Flow Technical Papers](https://www.onflow.org/technical-paper)
* [Flow Developer Documentation](https://docs.onflow.org/)
* [Flow Developer Discord Server](https://onflow.org/discord)

> * [Scalability Trilemma](https://aakash-111.medium.com/the-scalability-trilemma-in-blockchain-75fb57f646df)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Scalability Trilemma](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zooko%27s_triangle)
```

Author: I checked this again, and I think they don't really mean the same thing.

Zooko's triangle: Human-meaningful, decentralized, secure
Scalability trilemma: Scalability, decentralization, security

I didn't see a wiki for the `scalability trilemma` (or `blockchain trilemma` as I've seen it too). Btw this link was already in the doc, it was just moved to the bottom after the content was changed and I didn't think it really fit in the previous place.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* [Scalability Trilemma](https://vitalik.ca/general/2021/04/07/sharding.html#the-scalability-trilemma)
```
